The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gnostic Crucifixion, by G. R. S. Mead

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Gnostic Crucifixion

Author: G. R. S. Mead

Release Date: April 1, 2011 [EBook #35735]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GNOSTIC CRUCIFIXION ***




Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)









THE GNOSTIC CRUCIFIXION




WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR

                                      _Net._

  THRICE GREATEST HERMES (3 vols.)      30/-

  FRAGMENTS OF A FAITH FORGOTTEN        10/6

  DID JESUS LIVE 100 B.C.?               9/-

  THE WORLD-MYSTERY                      5/-

  THE GOSPEL AND THE GOSPELS             4/6

  APOLLONIUS OF TYANA                    3/6

  THE UPANISHADS (2 vols.)               3/-

  PLOTINUS                               1/-




  ECHOES FROM THE GNOSIS

  BY G. R. S. MEAD

  VOL. VII.


  THE GNOSTIC CRUCIFIXION


  THE THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY
  LONDON AND BENARES
  1907


  PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN




ECHOES FROM THE GNOSIS.


Under this general title is now being published a series of small volumes,
drawn from, or based upon, the mystic, theosophic and gnostic writings of
the ancients, so as to make more easily audible for the ever-widening
circle of those who love such things, some echoes of the mystic
experiences and initiatory lore of their spiritual ancestry. There are
many who love the life of the spirit, and who long for the light of
gnostic illumination, but who are not sufficiently equipped to study the
writings of the ancients at first hand, or to follow unaided the labours
of scholars. These little volumes are therefore intended to serve as
introduction to the study of the more difficult literature of the subject;
and it is hoped that at the same time they may become for some, who have,
as yet, not even heard of the Gnosis, stepping-stones to higher things.

G. R. S. M.




THE GNOSTIC CRUCIFIXION




CONTENTS

                             PAGE

  PREFACE                       9

  THE VISION OF THE CROSS      12

  COMMENTS                     20

  POSTCRIPT                    69


TEXTS

Bonnet (M.), _Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha_ (Leipzig, 1898).

James (M. R.), _Apocrypha Anecdota, T. & S._, v. i. (Cambridge, 1897).


_F._ = _Fragments of a Faith Forgotten_, 2nd. ed. (London, 1906).

_H._ = _Thrice Greatest Hermes_ (London, 1906).




ECHOES FROM THE GNOSIS


  VOL. I.   THE GNOSIS OF THE MIND.
  VOL. II.  THE HYMNS OF HERMES.
  VOL. III. THE VISION OF ARIDÆUS.
  VOL. IV.  THE HYMN OF JESUS.
  VOL. V.   THE MYSTERIES OF MITHRA.
  VOL. VI.  A MITHRIAC RITUAL.
  VOL. VII. THE GNOSTIC CRUCIFIXION.


SOME PROPOSED SUBJECTS FOR FORTHCOMING VOLUMES

  THE CHALDÆAN ORACLES.
  THE HYMN OF THE PRODIGAL.
  SOME ORPHIC FRAGMENTS.




THE GNOSTIC CRUCIFIXION.




PREFACE.


The Gnostic Mystery of the Crucifixion is most clearly set forth in the
new-found fragments of _The Acts of John_, and follows immediately on the
Sacred Dance and Ritual of Initiation which we endeavoured to elucidate in
Vol. IV. of these little books, in treating of _The Hymn of Jesus_.

The reader is, therefore, referred to the "Preamble" of that volume for a
short introduction concerning the nature of the Gnostic Acts in general
and of the Leucian _Acts of John_ in particular. I would, however, add a
point of interest bearing on the date which was forgotten, though I have
frequently remarked upon it when lecturing on the subject.

The strongest proof that we have in our fragment very early material is
found in the text itself, when it relates the following simple form of the
miracle of the loaves.

"Now if at any time He were invited by one of the Pharisees and went to
the bidding, we used to go with Him. And before each was set a single loaf
by the host; and of them He Himself also received one. Then He would give
thanks and divide His loaf among us; and from this little each had enough,
and our own loaves were saved whole, so that those who bade Him were
amazed."

If the marvellous narratives of the feeding of the five thousand had been
already in circulation, it is incredible that this simple story, which we
may so easily believe, should have been invented. Of what use, when the
minds of the hearers had been strung to the pitch of faith which had
already accepted the feeding of the five thousand as an actual physical
occurrence, would it have been to invent comparatively so small a wonder?
On the other hand, it is easy to believe that from similar simple stories
of the power of the Master, which were first of all circulated in the
inner circles, the popular narratives of the multitude-feeding miracles
could be developed. We, therefore, conclude, with every probability, that
we have here an indication of material of very early date.

Nevertheless when we come to the Mystery of the Crucifixion as set forth
in our fragment, we are not entitled to argue that the popular history was
developed from it in a similar fashion. The problem it raises is of
another order, and to it we will return when the reader has been put in
possession of the narrative, as translated from Bonnet's text. John is
supposed to be the narrator.

(The Arabic figures and the Roman figures in square brackets refer
respectively to Bonnet's and James' texts. I have added the side figures
for convenience of reference in the comments.)




THE VISION OF THE CROSS.


1. [97 (xii.)] And having danced these things with us, Beloved, the Lord
went out. And we, as though beside ourselves, or wakened out of sleep,
fled each our several ways.

2. I, however, though I saw the beginning of His passion could not stay to
the end, but fled unto the Mount of Olives weeping over that which had
befallen.

3. And when He was hung on the tree of the cross, at the sixth hour of the
day darkness came over the whole earth.

And my Lord stood in the midst of the Cave, and filled it with light, and
said:

4. "John, to the multitude below, in Jerusalem, I am being crucified, and
pierced with spears and reeds, and vinegar and gall is being given Me to
drink. To thee now I speak, and give ear to what I say. 'Twas I who put it
in thy heart to ascend this Mount, that thou mightest hear what disciple
should learn from Master, and man from God."

5. [98 (xiii.)] And having thus spoken, He showed me a Cross of Light set
up, and round the Cross a vast multitude, and therein one form and a
similar appearance, and in the Cross another multitude not having one
form.

6. And I beheld the Lord Himself above the Cross. He had, however, no
shape, but only as it were a voice--not, however, this voice to which we
are accustomed, but one of its own kind and beneficent and truly of God,
saying unto me:

7. "John, one there needs must be to hear those things, from Me; for I
long for one who will hear.

8. "This Cross of Light is called by Me for your sakes sometimes Word
(Logos), sometimes Mind, sometimes Jesus, sometimes Christ, sometimes
Door, sometimes Way, sometimes Bread, sometimes Seed, sometimes
Resurrection, sometimes Son, sometimes Father, sometimes Spirit, sometimes
Life, sometimes Truth, sometimes Faith, sometimes Grace.

9. "Now those things [it is called] as towards men; but as to what it is
in truth, itself in its own meaning to itself, and declared unto Us, [it
is] the defining (or delimitation) of all things, both the firm necessity
of things fixed from things unstable, and the 'harmony' of Wisdom.

10. "And as it is Wisdom in 'harmony,' there are those on the Right and
those on the Left--powers, authorities, principalities, and dæmons,
energies, threats, powers of wrath, slanderings--and the Lower Root from
which hath come forth the things in genesis.

11 [99]. "This, then, is the Cross which by the Word (Logos) hath been the
means of 'cross-beaming' all things--at the same time separating off the
things that proceed from genesis and those below it [from those above],
and also compacting them all into one.

12. "But this is not the cross of wood which thou shalt see when thou
descendest hence; nor am I he that is upon the cross--[I] whom now thou
seest not, but only hearest a voice.

13. "I was held [to be] what I am not, not being what I was to many
others; nay, they will call Me something else, abject and not worthy of
Me. As, then, the Place of Rest is neither seen nor spoken of, much more
shall I, the Lord of it, be neither seen [nor spoken of].

14. [100 (xiv.)] "Now the multitude of one appearance round the Cross is
the Lower Nature. And as to those whom thou seest in the Cross, if they
have not also one form, [it is because] the whole Race (or every Limb) of
Him who descended hath not yet been gathered together.

15. "But when the Upper Nature, yea, the Race that is coming unto Me, in
obedience to My Voice, is taken up, then thou who now hearkenest to Me,
shalt become it, and it shall no longer be what it is now, but above them
as I am now.

16. "For so long as thou callest not thyself Mine, I am not what I am. But
if thou hearkenest unto Me, hearing, thou, too, shalt be as I [am], and I
shall be what I was, when thou [art] as I am with Myself; for from this
thou art.

17. "Pay no attention, then, to the many, and them that are without the
mystery think little of; for know that I am wholly with the Father and the
Father with Me.

18. [101 (xv.)] "Nothing, then, of the things which they will say of Me
have I suffered; nay that Passion as well which I showed unto thee and the
rest, by dancing [it], I will that it be called a mystery.

19. "What thou art, thou seest; this did I show unto thee. But what I am,
this I alone know, [and] none else.

20. "What, then, is Mine suffer Me to keep; but what is thine see thou
through Me. To see Me as I really am I said is not possible, but only what
thou art able to recognise, as being kin [to Me] (or of the same Race).

21. "Thou hearest that I suffered; yet I did not suffer: that I suffered
not; yet I did suffer: that I was pierced; yet was I not smitten: that I
was hanged; yet I was not hanged: that blood flowed from me; yet it did
not flow: and in a word the things they say about Me I had not, and the
things they do not say those I suffered. Now what they are I will riddle
for thee; for I know that thou wilt understand.

22. "Understand, therefore, in Me, the slaying of a Word (Logos), the
piercing of a Word, the blood of a Word, the wounding of a Word, the
hanging of a Word, the passion of a Word, the nailing (or putting
together) of a Word, the death of a Word.

23. "And thus I speak separating off the man. First, then, understand the
Word, then shalt thou understand the Lord, and in the third place [only]
the man and what he suffered."

24. [102 (xvi.)] And having said these things to me, and others which I
know not how to say as He Himself would have it, He was taken up, no one
of the multitude beholding Him.

25. And when I descended I laughed at them all, when they told Me what
they did concerning Him, firmly possessed in myself of this [truth] only,
that the Lord contrived all things symbolically, and according to [His]
dispensation for the conversion and salvation of man.




COMMENTS.


The translation is frequently a matter of difficulty, for the text has
been copied in a most careless and unintelligent fashion, so that the
ingenuity of the editors has often been taxed to the utmost and has not
infrequently completely broken down. It is of course quite natural that
orthodox scribes should blunder when transcribing Gnostic documents, owing
to their ignorance of the subject and their strangeness to the ideas; but
this particular copyist is at times quite barbarous, and as the subject is
deeply mystical and deals with the unexpected, the reconstruction of the
original reading is a matter of great difficulty. With a number of
passages I am still unsatisfied, though I hope they are somewhat nearer
the spirit of the original than other reconstructions which have been
attempted.

It is always a matter of difficulty for the rigidly objective mind to
understand the point of view of the Gnostic scripture-writers. One thing,
however, is certain: they lived in times when the rigid orthodoxy of the
canon was not yet established. They were in the closest touch with the
living tradition of scripture-writing, and they knew the manner of it.

The probability is that paragraphs 1-3 are from the pen of the redactor or
compiler of the _Acts_, and that the narrative, beginning with the words
"And my Lord stood in the midst of the Cave," is incorporated from prior
material--a mystic vision or apocalypse circulated in the inner circles.

The compiler knows the general Gospel-story, and seems prepared to admit
its historical basis; at the same time he knows well that the story
circulated among the people is but the outer veil of the mystery, and so
he hands on what we may well believe was but one of many visions of the
mystic crucifixion.

The gentle contempt of those who had entered into the mystery, for those
unknowing ones who would fain limit the crucifixion to one brief historic
event, is brought out strongly, and savours, though mildly, of the
bitterness of the struggle between the two great forces of the inner and
spiritualizing and the outer and materializing traditions.

1. The disciples flee after beholding the inner mystery of the Passion and
At-one-ment as set forth in the initiating drama of the Mystic Dance which
formed the subject of our fourth volume.

2. Yet even John the Beloved, in spite of this initiation, cannot yet bear
the thought that his Master did actually suffer historically as a
malefactor on the physical cross. In his distress he flees unto the Mount
of Olives, above Jerusalem.

But to the Gnostic the Mount of Olives was no physical hill, though it was
a mount in the physical, and Jerusalem no physical city, though a city in
the physical. The Mount, however it might be distinguished locally, was
the Height of Contemplation, and the bringing into activity of a certain
inner consciousness; even as Jerusalem here was the Jerusalem below, the
physical consciousness.

3. The sentence "when He was hung on the tree of the Cross" contains a
great puzzle. The word for "tree" in the original is _batos_; this may
mean the "bush" or "tree" of the cross. But the Cross for the Gnostics was
a living symbol. It was not only the cross of dead wood, or the dead trunk
of a tree lopped of its branches--a symbol of Osiris in death; it was also
the Tree of Life, and was equated with the "Fiery Bush" out of which the
Angel of God spake to Moses--that is the Tree of Fiery Life, in the
Paradise of man's inner nature, whence the Word of God expresses itself to
one who is worthy to hear. And this Tree of Life was also, as the Cross,
the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; indeed, both are but one Tree, for
the fruit of the Tree of Life is the knowledge of good and evil, the cross
of the opposites.

But seeing that the word _batos_ in Greek had also another meaning, the
Gnostics, by their method of mystical word-play, based on the power of
sound, brought this further meaning into use for the expansion of the
idea. The difference of accentuation and of gender (though the reading of
the Septuagint is masculine and not feminine as is usual with _batos_ in
the sense of bush or tree) presented no difficulty to the word-alchemy of
these allegorists.

Hippolytus, in his _Refutation of all Heretics_, attempts to summarize a
system of the Christianized Gnosis which is assigned to the Docetæ; and
Docetism is precisely the chief characteristic of our _Acts of John_, as
we have already pointed out in Vol. IV. In this unsympathetic summary
there is a passage which throws some light on our puzzle. It would, of
course, require a detailed analysis of our hæresiologist's "refutation" of
the Docetic system to make the passage to which we refer (_op. cit._,
viii., 9) fully comprehensible; but as this would be too lengthy an
undertaking for these short comments, we must content ourselves with a
bald statement.

The pure spiritual emanations or ideas or intelligences of the Light
descend into the lowest Darkness of matter. For the moulding of vehicles
or bodies for them it is necessary to call in the aid of the God of Fire,
the creative or rather formative Power, who is "Living Fire begotten of
Light."

Hippolytus summarizes, doubtless imperfectly, from the Docetic document
that lay before him, as follows:

"Moses refers to this God as the Fiery God who spake from the _Batos_,
that is to say, from the Dark Air; for _Batos_ is all the Air subjected to
Darkness."

That is, presumably, the material Air, Air of the Darkness, as compared
with the spiritual Air or Air of the Light. The Docetic writer, Hippolytus
says, explained the use of the term as follows:

"Moses called it _Batos_, because, in their passing from Above, Below, all
the Ideas of the Light [that is, the Light-sparks or spirits of men] used
the Air as their means of passage (_batos_)."

In other words _Batos_, as Air, was the link between Light and Darkness,
which Darkness was regarded as essentially a flowing or Watery chaos. The
Batos was the Way Down and the Way Up of souls.

We are not, however, to suppose that the origin of this idea was the text
of _Exodus_. By no means; the idea came first, indeed was fundamental with
the Gnosis; the mystic exegesis of the "burning bush" passage was an
exercise in ingenuity. For the Gnosis, the that which at once separated
and united the Light and the Darkness was the Cross. The Angel of God
speaking to Moses out of the Fiery Batos was for the Christian Gnostics
one of the most striking apocalypses of ancient Jewish scripture; and it
was primarily one of the chief functions of the Gnosis to throw light on
the under-meaning. This the Docetic exegete does in his own fashion, using
the reading of the Greek Targum or Translation of the Seventy, in this
wise: "_Batos?_ _Batos_ does not mean 'bush' really, but 'medium of
transmission,'" It is by means of this that the Word of God comes unto
us--namely, by the mystery of the uniter-separator in one, which was
called by many names.

For instance, in setting forth the Sophia-mythus, or Wisdom-story, or
mystery of cosmogenesis, of the Valentinian school, Hippolytus (_op.
cit._, vi. 3), treats of the Cross as the final mystery of all. With
original documents before him, he writes:

"Now it is called Boundary, because it bounds off the Deficiency from the
Fullness [so as to make it] exterior to it; it is called Partaker because
it partakes of the Deficiency as well; and it is called Cross (or Stock)
because it hath been fixed immovably and unchangeably, so that nothing of
the Deficiency should be able to approach the eternities within the
Fullness."

Here it is useless to tie oneself to the physical symbol of a cross. The
Stauros (Cross) in its true self is a living idea, a reality or
root-principle. It is the principle of separation and limit, dividing
entity from non-entity, being from non-being, perfection from
imperfection, fullness or sufficiency from deficiency or
insufficiency--Light from Darkness. It is the that which causes all
opposites. At the same time it shares in all opposites, for it is the
immediate emanation of the Father Himself, and therefore unites while
separating. It is, therefore, the principle of participation or sharing
in, sharing in both the Fullness and the Deficiency. Finally, it is the
Stock or Pillar as that which "has stood, stands and will stand"--the
principle of immobility, as the energy of the Father in His aspect of the
supreme Individuality that changes not, because he is Lord of the
ever-changing.

That such a master-idea is difficult to grasp goes without saying; it was
confessedly the supreme mystery. From it the mind, the formal mind of man,
"falls back unable to grasp it"; for it is precisely this personal mind
that creates duality, and insinuates itself between cause and effect. The
spiritual Mind alone can embrace the opposites.

But to return to our text. "When He was hung on the _batos_ of the
Cross"--when He had reached the state of balance, was in the mystic
centre--then at the sixth hour, that is mid-day, when there was greatest
light, there was also greatest darkness.

And then when the Lord, the Higher Self of the man, was balanced and
justified, the man, the disciple, became conscious, in the cave of his
heart--that is to say, in his inmost substantial nature--of the Presence
of Light.

4. Thereon follow the illumination and the explanation of the familiar
drama of appearance taught to those "without the mystery."

"The multitude below in Jerusalem" is the lower nature of the man, his
unillumined mind. "Jerusalem Below" is set over against "Jerusalem Above,"
the City of God. Jerusalem Below is that nature in him that is still
unordered and unpurified; while Jerusalem Above is that ordered and
purified portion of his substance that can respond to the immediate
shining of the Light, which further orders it according to the Ordering of
Heaven.

And yet the drama below is real enough; there are ever crucifixion and
piercing and the drinking of vinegar and gall, before the triumphant
Christ is born. It is by such means that His Body is conformed; it is the
mystery of the transformation of what we call evil into good. The Body of
the Christ is perfected by the absorption of the impersonal evil of the
world, which He transmutes into blessing.

"'Twas I who put it in thy heart to ascend this Mount." I am thy Self, thy
true God; 'twas I energizing in thee who enabled thee to rise to the
height of contemplation, where thou canst "hear what disciple should learn
from Master and man from God." The man has now reached the stage of Hearer
in the Spiritual Mysteries.

5. There then follows the vision of the great Cross of Light, fixed firm,
and stretching from earth to heaven. Round its foot on earth is a vast
multitude of all the nations of the world; they resemble one another in
that they are configured according to the Darkness, their "Spark burns
low." On the Cross, or in it, for doubtless the seer saw within as well as
without, was another multitude of various grades of light, being formed
into some marvellous Image like unto the Divine, but not yet completed--as
it might be the Rose on the Cross, in the famous symbol of the
Rosicrucians.

6. And above the Cross, lost in the dazzling brilliancy of the Fullness,
John beheld the Lord; he _beheld_ but could not _see_, because of the
Great Light, as we are told in another great vision of the Master in the
_Pistis Sophia_. He can hear only a Voice. But this Voice is no voice of
man, but one "truly of God"--a Bath-kol or "Heavenly Voice," as the Rabbis
called it--a Voice of sweetest reasonableness, using no words, but of a
higher order of utterance, that can make the man speak to himself in his
own language, using his own terms.

7. The sentence "I long for one who will hear," is instinct with the
yearning of the Divine Love, the eagerness to bestow, the longing to speak
if only there be one to hear.

8. There then follows a list of synonyms of the Cross, every one of which
shows that the Cross, if a symbol, must be taken to denote the
master-symbol of all symbols. It is the key to the chief nomenclature of
the Gnosis and the greatest terms of the Gospel. These terms, it is
stated, are used by the Wisdom "for your sakes," that is, to bring home in
many ways to the hearts of men the intuition of the mystery.

As is explained later on in the text, the mystery of the Cross is the
mystery of the Word, the Spiritual Man, or Great Man, the Divine
Individuality. Therefore is it called Word or Reason, Mind, Jesus and
Christ. Son and Father; for Jesus is the Christ, both as human and divine,
the two natures uniting in one in the Cross; and the Son is the Father in
a still more divine meaning of the mystery; for both Son and Cross are of
the Father alone, they are Himself manifesting Himself to Himself. The
whole is the mystery of Ātman or the Self.

The Door is the Door of the Two in One, the state of equilibrium of the
opposites which opens out into the all-embracing consciousness and
understanding of all oppositions.

The Cross is the Way on which there is no travelling, for it perpetually
enters into itself; it is the true Meth-od, not so much in the sense of
the Way-between or the Medium or Mediator, as in the sense of the Means of
Gnosis.

It is also called Seed because it is the mystery of the power of growth
and development; it is self-initiative.

And if the Cross be Son and Father in separation and union, or as
simultaneously Cause and Result, it is likewise Spirit or Ātman, and
therefore Life.

It is also Truth or the Perpetual Paradox, distinguishing and uniting in
itself all pros and cons, and all analysis and synthesis in simultaneous
operation.

Therefore also is it called Faith, because it is the that which is stable
and unchanging amid perpetual change. Faith in its true mystic meaning
seems to denote the power of withdrawing the personal consciousness from
between the pairs of opposites, where these appear external and other than
oneself, and embracing the opposites within the greater consciousness,
when they are within oneself and appear as natural processes in the great
economy.

Faith is of the contemplative mind; it embraces, it includes. It is
therefore of the Great Mother, as the life and substance of the Cross; so
also is it of Grace, elsewhere called Wisdom.

Finally, the Cross regarded from this point of view is called Bread, the
substance of Life.

In a remarkable paper in _The Theosophical Review_, Nov., 1907, E. R.
Innes speaks of a vision of a great drama of those Powers beyond the
mind-spheres, which in the Indian scriptures are called Food and
Eater--that is to say, the mystical union between the Not-self and the
Self.

In the _Chhāndogyopaniṣhad_, for instance, we read of one who had
passed into the heaven-world possessing a knowledge of the identity of the
Self and Not-self. The transformations of his vehicles that thus occur in
the inner states or worlds become as it were processes of natural
digestion in his Great Body, for we read:

"Having what food he wills, what form he wills, this song he singing sits:

  "'O wonder, wonder, wonder!
  Food I; food I; food I!
  Food-eater I; food-eater I; food-eater I!'"

(See my _World-Mystery_, 2nd ed., p. 179.)

Our author in similar fashion writes of a soul watching the processes of
its own substance in the heaven-world.

"She watched the interaction of those two great currents of the One Great
Life-Force--the Life-Force as Supporter, the Life-Force as Sustainer. She
watched the great transfiguration of the crossing over of the
surface-forms as life met life in perfect mystic union. As the currents
crossed the forms changed, but without loss of life or consciousness. The
Powers crossed and recrossed; and with each appearance of that sacred
symbol there was further expansion and intensification of the Life-Force.
At each piercing or insinuation of the one into the other, that which had
been two became one, yet there still remained the two. She watched the
great mystery of that Cross on which the Heavenly Man dies in order to
live again.

"In heaven you do not demolish forms in order to sustain life, you daily
insinuate yourself into all the forms you meet, and thus by supplying them
with food, the food of your own greater life, you become each separate
object, and gain in power and expansiveness. Thus in heaven by sacrifice
do you grow and live, and slowly become the world. Thus in heaven do you
give life to others in order to live yourself; thus do the many rebecome
the One. The Great Mystery of the Bread of Life which must be partaken of
by all before the Day of Triumph was acted out before her eyes."

And it might be added that as heaven is a state and not a place, the
mystery can be consummated on earth, and that this is the true sacrifice
of the Christ and the Way to become a Christ.

9. Ideas of this or a similar order may be held not rashly to underlie the
words of our text. The Cross of Life may well be called the Harmony--or
articulation, or joining-together--of Wisdom, for it is by means of Wisdom
that all the contraries are joined together, and this Articulation
constitutes the "firm necessity" of Fate, which was also called in the
Gnostic schools the Harmony. And if it is a Cross of Life, it is also a
Cross of Light, for Life and Light are the eternally united twin-natures,
female and male, of the Logos, the Good. Life is Passion and Light is
Understanding. The Logos divides Himself to experience and know Himself.

10. All opposites unite in Wisdom as a ground; she is the pure substance
in which all the powers play. It is only when the Cross is regarded as a
separator, that it may be said to have a right and a left, with good
forces on the one hand and evil on the other. The forces are in reality in
themselves the same forces; it is the personality of the man (represented
by the upright of the Cross), which refers all things to its incomplete
self, that regards them as good and evil.

This personality is rooted in the Lower Root or lower nature, and
stretches upward towards the Above.

But in reality there are roots above and branches below, or roots below
and branches above, of the trunk of this Tree of Life and Light. Though
the nomenclature is somewhat different, I cannot refrain from quoting a
striking passage from a Gnostic scripture to give the reader some idea of
the lofty region of thought to which the Gnosis accustomed its disciples.

It is taken from _The Great Announcement_, a document ascribed by
Hippolytus to the very beginning of the Christianized Gnosis. Strong
efforts have been made to question this ascription, and to prove the
document to be of a later date, but I think I have established a high
probability that it may be even a pre-Christian writing (see _H._, i.
184).

The text is to be found in Hippolytus' _Refutation of all Heresies_ (vi.,
18):

"To you, therefore, I say what I say and write what I write. And the
writing is this:

"Of the universal Æons (Eternities) there are two Branchings, without
beginning or end, from one Root, which is the Power unseeable,
incomprehensible Silence.

"Of these Branchings one is manifested from Above--the Great Power, Mind
of the universals, ordering all things, male; and the other from
Below--Great Thought, female, generating all things.

"Thence partnering one another they pair (lit. have union--_syzygía_), and
bring into manifestation the Middle Distance, incomprehensible Air without
beginning or end.

"In this is that Father, who supports and nourishes the things which have
beginning and end.

"This is He who has stood, stands and shall stand--a male-female Power in
accordance with the transcendent Boundless Power, which hath neither
beginning nor end, subsisting in onlyness.

"It was by emanating from this Power (_sci._, Incomprehensible Silence)
that Thought-in-onlyness became two.

"Yet was He, (the Supernal Father) one; for having her (_sci._ Thought) in
Himself He was alone [that is, all-one, or only, that is one-ly]. He was
not, however, [in this state] 'first,' although transcendent; it was only
in manifesting Himself from Himself that He became 'second' [that is to
say, as He who stands]. Nay, He was not even called 'Father' till Thought
named Him 'Father.'

"As, therefore, Himself pro-ducing Himself by means of Himself, He
manifested to Himself His own Thought; so also His Thought on manifesting
did not make [Him], but beholding Him, she concealed the Father, that is
the Power, in Herself, and is [thus] male-female, Power and Thought.

"Thence is it that they partner one another (for Power in no way differs
from Thought) and yet are one. From the things Above is discovered Power,
and from those Below Thought.

"So is it, too, with that which is manifested from them; namely, that
though it (_sci._ the Middle Distance, Incomprehensible Air) is one, it is
found to be two, male-female, having the female in itself.

"Thus is Mind in Thought--inseparable from one another, which though one
are yet found to be two."

I believe that our Vision of the Cross sets forth in living symbol
precisely what is explained above in more "abstract" terms. It would,
however, be a mistake to make abstractions of these sublime ideas; they
must be realized as fullnesses, as transcendent realities. The Air, the
Batos, the Middle Distance, is the manifestation, or thinking-manifest, of
the Divine to Itself, the true meaning of _mā-yā_. (See the
Trismegistic Sermon, "Though Unmanifest God is most Manifest," and the
commentary, _H._, ii., 99-109).

11. I have translated the term διαπηξἁμενος by "cross-beaming," for
διαπἡγιον is a "cross-beam"; and I would refer the reader to the famous
myth of Plato known as "The Vision of Er," where the same idea is set
forth when we read:

"There they saw the extremities of the Boundaries of the Heaven, extended
in the midst of the Light; for this Light was the final Boundary of
Heaven--_somewhat like the undergirdings of ships_--and thus confined its
whole revolution." (See _H._, i., 440.)

This "cross-beaming" or operation of the Cross is the mode of the
energizing of the Logos. It is the simultaneous separating and joining of
the generable and the ingenerable, the two modes of the Self-generable; it
is the link between personal and impersonal, bound and free, finite and
infinite. It is the instrument of creation, male-female in one.

12. There is little surprise, therefore, in learning that this mystery is
not the "cross of wood" which the disciple will see and has seen in the
pictures framed by his lower mind, when reading the historicized narrative
of the mystery-drama or hearing the great story. Nor is it to be imagined
that the Lord could be hung upon such a cross of wood, seeing that He is
crucified in all men--He whom even the disciple in contemplation cannot
see as He is, but can only hear the Wisdom of His Voice.

13. "I was held to be what I am not." As to what the many say concerning
the mystery, they speak as the many vain and contradictory opinions. Nay,
even those who believed in Him have not understood; they have been content
with a poor and unworthy conception of the mystery.

The teaching seems to be that as the Christ-story was intended to be the
setting-forth of an exemplar of what perfected man might be--namely, that
the path was fully opened for him all the way up to God--it was spiritual
suicide to rest content with a limited and prejudiced view. Every mould of
thought was to be broken, every imperfect conception was to be
transcended, if there was to be realization.

For those who cling to the outward forms and symbols the Place of Rest is
neither seen nor spoken of. This Place of Rest, this Home of Peace, is in
reality the very Cross itself, the Firm Foundation, the that on which the
whole creation rests. And if the Place of Rest, where all things cross,
and unite, the Mystic Centre of the whole system, which is everywhere, is
not seen or spoken of, "much more shall the Lord of it be neither seen nor
spoken of"--He who has the power, of the Centre, who can adjust His
"centre of gravity" at every moment of time, and therewith the attitude of
this Great Body or, if it be preferred, of his Mind, and thus be in
perpetual balance, as the Justified and the Just One.

14. The interpretation of the Vision that follows in the text may in its
turn be interpreted from several standpoints. It may be regarded cosmicly
according to the _restauratio omnium_, when the whole creation becomes the
object of the Great Mercy, as Basilides calls it; or it may be taken
soteriologically as referring to the salvation or the making safe or sure
of our humanity, or it may be referred to the perfection of the individual
man.

The multitude of one appearance are the Earth-bound, the Hylics as the
Gnostics called them; that is, those who are immersed in things of matter,
the "delights of the world." They are the Dead, because they are under
the sway of birth-and-death, the spheres of Fate. They have not yet "risen
from the Dead," and consciously ascended the Cross of Light and Life.

Thus in the preface to _The Book of the Gnoses of the Invisible God_, that
is to say, "The Book of the Gnosis of Jesus the Living One"--which begins
with the beautiful words: "I have loved you and longed to give you
Life"--we read the following Saying of the Lord:

"Jesus saith: Blessed is the man who crucifieth the world, and doth not
let the world crucify him."

And later on the mystery is set forth in another Saying:

"Jesus saith: Blessed is the man who knoweth this Word, and hath brought
down the Heaven, and borne the Earth and raised it heavenwards; and he
becometh the Midst, for it (the Midst) is a 'nothing.'" (_F._, 518, 519.)

Those who have become spiritual, who have "risen from the Dead," are born
into the Race of the Logos, they become kin with Him.

Of this Race much has been written by the mystics of the many different
schools of these early days.

Thus the Jewish Gnostic commentator of the Naassene Document writes:

"One is the Nature Below which is subject to Death; and one is the Race
without a king [that is, those who are kings of themselves] which is born
Above" (_H._, i., 164.).

And the Christian Gnostic commentator refers to the "ineffable Race of
perfect men" (_H._, i., 166), who are in the Logos.

Such _illuminati_ were called by one tradition of the Christianized Gnosis
the Race of Elxai, the Hidden Power or Holy Spirit, the Spouse of Iexai,
the Hidden Lord or Logos. (_H._, ii., 242; see my _Did Jesus live 100
B.C.?_ chap. xviii.)

Philo of Alexandria tells us that "Wisdom, who, after the fashion of a
mother, brings forth the self-taught Race, declares that God is the Sower
of it" (_H._, i., 220). This is the term he applies to his beloved
Therapeuts, adding that "this Race is rare and found with difficulty."

Elsewhere he tells us that the angels are the "people" of God; but there
is a still higher degree of union, whereby a man becomes one of the Race,
or Kin, of God. This Race is an intimate union of all them who are "kin to
Him"; they become one. For this Race "is one, the highest one; but
'people' is the name of many."

"As many, then, as have advanced in discipline and instruction, and been
perfected therein, have their lot among this 'many.'

"But they who have passed beyond these introductory exercises, becoming
natural disciples of God, receiving Wisdom free from all toil, migrate to
this incorruptible and perfect Race, receiving a lot superior to their
former lives in genesis" (_H._, i., 554.).

And so in one of the Hymns of Thrice Greatest Hermes, after the triple
trisagion, the "Hermes" or Illuminated prays:

"And fill me with Thy Power and with this Grace of Thine, that I may give
the Light to those in ignorance of the Race--my Brethren and Thy Sons."
(_H._, ii., 20.).

Philo calls it "self-taught," just as the Buddhists speak of the Arhats as
_asekha_; and the Trismegistic teacher writes:

"This Race, my sons, is never taught; but when He willeth it, its memory
is restored by God." (_H._, ii., 221.)

The "Elect Race" of Valentinus is the "Sonship" of Basilides that
incarnates on earth for the abolition of Death. (_F._, 303.)

In the _Pistis Sophia_ document, the Sophia, or the soul turning towards
the Light, first utters seven repentances, or "turnings-of-the-mind," or
rather of the whole nature. At the fourth of these, the turning-point of
some subcycle of the great Return, she prays that the Image of the Light
may not be turned or averted from her, for the time is come when "those
who turn in the lowest regions" should be regarded--"the mystery which is
made the type of the Race." (_F._, 471.)

Again in the introduction to _The Book of the Great Logos according to the
Mystery_, the disciples beg the Master to explain the Mystery of the Word.
Jesus answers that the Life of His Father consists in their purifying
their souls from all earthly stain, and making them to become the Race of
the Mind, so that they may be filled with understanding and by His
teaching perfect themselves. (_F._, 528.)

Finally in the marvellous _Untitled Apocalypse_ of the Bruce Codex we
read:

"These words said the Lord of the Universe to them, and disappeared from
them, and hid Himself from them.

"And the Births-of-matter rejoiced that they had been remembered, and were
glad that they had come out of the narrow and difficult place, and prayed
to the Hidden Mystery:

"'Give us authority that we may create for ourselves æons and worlds
according to Thy Word, upon which Thou didst agree with Thy servant; for
Thou alone art the changeless One, Thou alone the boundless, the
uncontainable, self-taught, self-born Self-father; Thou alone art the
unshakeable and unknowable; Thou alone art Silence and Love, and Source of
all; Thou alone art virgin of matter, spotless; whose Race no man can
tell, whose manifestation no man can comprehend.'" (_F._, 564.)

To understand, man must pass beyond the stage of man, and self-realize
himself as "kin to Him"--the Logos.

It is, however, doubtful whether "Race" is the correct reading in our
text; but as it is the clear reading in 15 the above notes are germane to
our study. The MS. apparently reads "every Limb." This again is one of the
most general Gnostic mystical terms, and is taken over from the Osiric
Mysteries. The Limbs of the God are scattered abroad, and collected
together again in the resurrection. The inner meaning of this graphic
symbolism may be gleaned from the following striking passages.

In a MS. of the Gnostic Marcus there is a description of the method of
symbolizing the Great Body of the Heavenly Man, whereby the twenty-four
letters of the Greek alphabet were assigned in pairs to the twelve Limbs.
This Body was the symbol of the ideal economy, dispensation or ordering of
the universe, its planes, regions, hierarchies, and powers. (_F._, 366.)

This also is the true Body of man, the Source of all his bodies. And so we
read the following mystery-saying in _The Gospel of Eve_:

"I stood on a lofty mountain and saw a Great Man, and another, a dwarf,
and heard as it were a Voice of thunder, and drew nigh for to hear. And He
spake unto me and said: 'I am thou, and thou art I; and wheresoever thou
art, I am there, and in all am I sown (or scattered). And whencesoever
thou willest, thou gatherest Me; and gathering Me, thou gatherest
Thyself.'" (_F._, 439.)

This is a vision of the Great Person and little person, of the Higher Self
and lower self. It may also be interpreted in terms of the Logos and
humanity; but it comes nearer home to think of it as the mystery of the
individual man--the scattering of the Limbs of the Great Person in the
personalities that have been his in many births.

This idea is brought out more clearly in a passage from _The Gospel of
Philip_. It is an apology or defence, as it was called, a formula to be
used by the soul in its ascent above, as it passed through the space of
the Midst; and for the mystic it is a declaration of the state of a man
who is in his last compulsory earth-life.

"I have recognised myself, and gathered myself together from all sides. I
have sown no children for the Ruler, but have torn up his roots, and have
gathered together my Limbs that were scattered abroad. I know Thee who
Thou art; for I am of those from Above." (_Ibid._)

He has sown no children to the Ruler, the Lord of Death; he has not
contracted any fresh debt, or created a new form of personality, into
which he must again incarnate. But he has torn up the roots of Death, by
shattering the form of egoity, and bursting the bonds of Fate. He has
gathered together his Limbs, completed the articulation of his Perfect
Body.

The Limbs were according to certain orderings, one of which was the
configuration of the five-fold Star, the five-limbed Man. Thus in _The
Acts of Thomas_ we read:

"Come Thou who art more ancient far than the five holy Limbs--Mind,
Thought, Reflection, Thinking, Reasoning! Commune with them of later
birth!" (_F._, 422.)

These five Limbs are also the five Words of the mystery of the Vesture of
Light in the _Pistis Sophia_ (p. 16), with which the Christ is clothed in
power on the Day of Triumph, the Great Day "Come unto us," when His Limbs
are gathered together and the Song of the Powers begins:

"Come unto us, for we are Thy Fellow-Limbs. We are all one with thee. We
are one and the same, and Thou art one and the same."

In the whole document much is said of the "sweet mysteries that are in the
Limbs of the Ineffable," but it would be too long to repeat it here. It
will be perhaps of greater service to append a very striking passage, from
_The Books of the Saviour_, which has been copied into the MS. of the
_Pistis Sophia_ (pp. 253, 254):

"And they who are worthy of the Mysteries that dwell in the Ineffable,
which are those that have not emanated--these are prior to the First
Mystery. To use a similitude and correspondence of speech that ye may
understand, they are the Limbs of the Ineffable. And each is according to
the dignity of its Glory--the Head according to the dignity of the Head,
the Eye according to the dignity of the Eye, the Ear according to the
dignity of the Ear, and the rest of the Limbs [in like fashion]; so that
the matter is plain: There are many Limbs (Members) but only one Body.

"Of this I have spoken in a plan, a correspondence and similitude, but not
in its true form; nor have I revealed the Word in Truth, but as the
Mystery of the Ineffable.

"And all the Limbs that are in Him..., that is, they that dwell in the
Mystery of the Ineffable, and they that dwell in Him, and also the Three
Spaces that follow according to their Mysteries--of all of these in truth
and verity am I the Treasure; apart from which there is no Treasure
peculiar to [this] cosmos. But there are other Words and Mysteries and
Regions [of other worlds].

"Now, therefore, Blessed is he who hath found the Words of the Mysteries
of the Space towards the exterior. He is a God who hath found the Words of
the Mysteries of the second Space, in the midst. He is a Saviour and free
of every space who hath found the Words of the Mysteries of the third
Space towards the interior....

"But He, on the other hand, who hath found the Words of the Mysteries
which I have set forth for you according to a similitude--namely, the
Limbs of the Ineffable--Amēn I say unto you, that man who hath found
the Words of those Mysteries in the Truth of God, he is the First in
Truth, and like unto Him; for it is through these Words and Mysteries that
[all things are made] and the universe itself stands through that First
One. Therefore is he who hath found the Words of these Mysteries, like
unto the First. For it is the gnosis of the Gnosis of the Ineffable in
which I have spoken with you this day."

It is thus seen that the means used in revealing the manner of the highest
Mysteries of the Ineffable was by the similitude of the Limbs or Members
of the Body. It, therefore, follows, as we have already seen, that this
symbolism was one of the most, if not the most, fundamental in this
Gnosis. The three stages of perfectioning are those of the Saint, God and
Saviour. But these are still stages in evolution or process, no matter how
sublime they be. The fourth or consummation is other; it transcends
process, it is ever itself with itself, embracing all processes and all
powers simultaneously. But we must not be tempted to comment on this
instructive passage, for there is quite enough material in it to develop
into a small treatise in itself. For an admirable intuition of the Mystery
of the Limbs of the Ineffable, and the meaning of the words "the Head is
according to the dignity of the Head," etc., the reader is referred to the
beautiful passage in _The Untitled Apocalypse_ of the Bruce Codex, quoted
in the comments on _The Hymn of Jesus_ (pp. 54, 55).

The Gnostic seers lost themselves in the contemplation of the simultaneous
simplicity and multiplicity of these Mysteries. Thus again in the same
_Untitled Apocalypse_ we read:

"He it is whose Limbs (Members) make a myriad of myriads of Powers, each
one of which comes from Him." (_F._, 547).

This graphic symbolism of the Limbs is derived from the tradition of the
Osiric Mysteries. Many a passage could be quoted in illustration from _The
Book of the Coming-forth by Day_, that strange and marvellous collection
of Egyptian Rituals commonly known as the _Book of the Dead_; but perhaps
the under-meaning of the mystery is nowhere more clearly shown than in the
following magnificent passage from _The Litany of the Sun_, inscribed on
the Tombs of the Kings of ancient Thebes:

"The Kingly Osiris is an intelligent Essence. His Limbs conduct Him; His
'Fleshes' open the way for Him. Those who are born from Him create Him.
They rest when they have caused the Kingly Osiris to be born.

"It is He who causes them to be born. It is He who engenders them. It is
He who causes them to exist. His Birth is the Birth of Rā in Amenti. He
causes the Kingly Osiris to be born; He causes the Birth of Himself."

(See my _World-Mystery_, 2nd ed., p. 162.)

It requires no elaboration to show that this is precisely the same mystery
as the secret set forth in our Vision of the Cross. The Kingly Osiris is
Ātman, the Self, the True Man, the Monad. This is the Kingly Osiris in
his male-female nature, self-creative. Ātman is both the producer and
product of evolution. In a restricted sense the above may be interpreted
from the standpoint of the individuality and its series of personalities
in incarnation.

15. And now to return to the text. The Race is the Upper Nature, now
scattered abroad in the hearts of men; it is the true Spirit of man, the
hidden Divinity within him. It is this which re-turns, and so causes the
man to turn or repent. It is obedient, that is audient, to the Voice of
the Self, the compelling Utterance of the Logos. He who not only hears,
but hearkens to or obeys the sweet counsels of this Great Persuasion,
becomes this Upper Nature consciously; and therefore it no longer is what
it was, for it is conscious in the man, and so the man is above men of the
lower nature.

16. These mysterious sentences all set forth the state of true
Self-consciousness. So long as man is not conscious that he is Divine, so
long is the Divine in him not what it really is; the "lower" "limits" the
"higher." Union is attained by "hearkening," by "attention." Then it is
that the man becomes his Higher Self, and that Higher Self becomes in its
turn the Self, having taken his self in separation into his Self as union.

17. This "attention" is the straining or striving towards the One; and
therefore no attention must be paid to the many. The whole strife of
warring opinions and doubts must be reconciled, or at-oned, within the
Mystery. The thought must be allowed to dwell but little on "those
without." A height must be reached from which the whole human drama can be
seen as a spectacle below and within; this height is not with regard to
space and place, but with respect to consciousness and realization that
all is taking place within the man's Great Body as the operations of the
Divine economy. They who are "without the mystery" are not arbitrarily
excluded, but are those who prefer to go forth without instead of
returning within.

18. They who have re-turned, or turned back on themselves, and entered
into themselves for the realization of true Self-consciousness, alone can
understand the meaning of the Great Passion, as has been so admirably set
forth in the Mystery-Ritual of the Dance.

Those who have consciousness of these spiritual verities, nay, even those
who have but dimly felt their greatness, will easily understand that the
story of the crucifixion as believed in by the masses was for the Gnostics
but the shadow of an eternal happening that most intimately concerned
every man in his inmost nature.

19. The outer story was centred round a dramatic crisis of death on a
stationary cross--a dead symbol, and a symbol of death. But the inner rite
was one of movement and "dancing," a living symbol and a symbol of life.
This was shown to the disciple--indeed, as we have seen, he was made in
the Dance to partake in it--that he might know the mystery of suffering in
a moment of Great Experience. He saw it and became it; it was shown him in
action. He had seen sorrow and suffering, and the cause of it had been
dimly felt; but its ceasing he did not yet know really, for the ceasing of
sorrow could only come when he could realize sorrow and joy, suffering and
bliss, simultaneously. And that mystery the Christ alone knows.

20. Let the disciple then first see the suffering of the man through, not
his own, but His Master's eyes. He will first only see the mystery, grasp
it intellectually; he will not as yet realize it. When he realizes it,
there will then be bliss indeed, for he will begin to become the Master
Himself. And the Master is the conqueror of woe--not, however, in the
sense of the annihilator of it, but as the one who rejoices in it; for he
knows that it is the necessary concomitant of bliss, and that the more
pain he suffers in one portion of his nature, the more bliss he
experiences in another; the deeper the one the deeper the other, and
therewith the intenser becomes his whole nature. His Great Body is
learning to respond to greater and greater impulses or "vibrations."

The consummation is that he becomes capable of experiencing joy in sorrow
and sorrow in joy; and thus reaches to the gnosis that these are
inseparables, and that the solution of the mystery is the power of ever
experiencing both simultaneously.

21. It may thus to some extent become clear that what is asserted of the
Christ in the general Gospel-story is typically true and yet is not true.
Those who look at one side only of the living picture see in a glass
darkly.

If we could only realize that all the ugliness and misery and confusion of
life is but the underside, as it were, of a pattern woven on the Great
Loom or embroidered by Divine Fingers! We can in our imperfect
consciousness see only the underside, the medley of crossing of threads,
the knots and finishings-off; we cannot see the pattern. Nevertheless it
exists simultaneously with the underside. The Christ sees both sides
simultaneously, and understands.

22. But the term that our Gnostic writer chooses with which to depict this
grade of being is not Christ, but Word or Reason (Logos). This Reason is
not the ratiocinative faculty in man which conditions him as a duality; it
is rather more as a Divine Monad, as Pure Reason, or that which can hold
all opposites in one. It is called Word because it is the immediate
intelligible Utterance of God.

23. This is the first mystery that man must learn to understand; then will
he be able to understand God as unity; and only finally will he understand
the greatest mystery of all--man, the personal man, the thing we each of
us now are, God in multiplicity, and why there is suffering.

24. With this the writer breaks off, knowing fully how difficult it is to
express in human speech the living ideas that have come to birth in him,
and knowing that there are still more marvellous truths of which he has
caught some glimpse or heard some echo, but which he feels he can in no
way set forth in proper decency.

And so he tells us the Lord is taken up, unseen by the multitudes. That is
to say, presumably, no one in the state of the multiplicity of the lower
nature can behold the vision of unity.

25. When he descends from the height of contemplation, however, he
remembers enough to enable him to laugh at the echoes of his former doubts
and fancies and misconceptions, and to make him realize the marvellous
power of the natural living symbolic language that underlies the words of
the mystery-narrative that sets forth the story of the Christ.




POSTCRIPT.


The vision itself is not so marvellous as the instruction; nevertheless it
allows us to see that the Cross in its supernal nature is the Heavenly Man
with arms outstretched in blessing, showering benefits on all--the
perpetual Self-sacrifice (_F._, 330). And in this connection we should
remind ourselves of the following striking sentence from _The Untitled
Apocalypse_ of the Bruce Codex, an apocalypse which contains perhaps the
most sublime visions that have survived to us from the Gnosis:

"The Outspreading of His Hands is the manifestation of the Cross."

And then follows the key of the mystery:

"The Source of the Cross is the Man [Logos] whom no man can comprehend."

(See _Hymn of Jesus_, p. 53.)

No man can comprehend Man; the little cannot contain the Great, except
potentially.

It was some echo of this sublime teaching that found its way into the
naïve though allegorical narrative of _The Acts of Philip_. When Philip
was crucified he cursed his enemies.

     "And behold suddenly the abyss was opened, and the whole of the place
     in which the proconsul was sitting was swallowed up, and the whole of
     the temple, and the viper which they worshipped, and great crowds,
     and the priests of the viper, about seven thousand men, besides women
     and children, except where the apostles were; they remained
     unshaken."

This is a cataclysm in which the lower nature of the man is engulfed. The
apostles are his higher powers; the rest the opposing forces. The latter
plunge into Hades and experience the punishments of those who crucify the
Christ and his apostles. They are thus converted and sing their
repentance. Whereupon a Voice was heard saying: "I shall be merciful to
you in the Cross of Light."

Philip is reproved by the Saviour for his unmerciful spirit.

"But I, O Philip, will not endure thee, because thou hast swallowed up the
men in the abyss; but behold My Spirit is in them, and I will bring them
up from the dead; and thus they, seeing thee, shall believe in the Glory
of Him that sent thee.

"And the Saviour having turned, stretched up His hand, and marked a Cross
in the Air coming down from Above even unto the Abyss, and it was full of
Light, and had its form after the likeness of a ladder. And all the
multitude that had gone down from the City into the Abyss came up on the
Ladder of the Cross of Light; but there remained below the proconsul and
the viper which these worshipped. And when the multitude had come up,
having looked upon Philip hanging head downwards, they lamented with
great lamentation at the lawless action which they had done."

The doers of the "lawless" deed are the same as the "lawless Jews" in the
_Acts of John_--"those who are under the law of the lawless Serpent"; that
is to say, those who are under the sway of Generation, as contrasted with
those under the law of Re-generation (see _Hymn of Jesus_, pp. 28, 47).

Philip stands for the man learning the last lesson of divine mercy. The
Proconsul and the Viper are the antitypes of the Saviour and the Serpent
of Wisdom. The crucifixion of Philip is, however, not the same as the
crucifixion of the Christ; he is hanged reversed, his head to the earth
and not towards heaven. It is a lower grade of the mysteries.

Concerning the mystery of the crucifixion of the Christ we learn somewhat
of its inner nature from the doctrines of the Docetæ.

His baptism was on this wise: He washed Himself in the Jordan, that is
the Stream of the Logos, and after His purification in the Life-giving
Water, He became possessed of a spiritual or perfect body, the type and
signature of which were in accordance with the matter of his virginity,
that is of virgin substance; so that when the World-ruler, or God of
generation or death, condemned his own plasm, the physical body, to death,
that is to the Cross, the soul nourished in that physical body might strip
off the body of flesh, and nail it to the "tree," and yet triumph over the
powers of the Ruler and not be found naked, but clothed in a robe of
glory. Hence the saying: "Except a man be born of Water and the Spirit he
cannot enter into the Kingship of the Heavens; that which is born of the
flesh is flesh." (_F._, p. 221).

It was because of these and such like ideas, and in the conviction that
the mystery of the crucifixion was to be worked out in every man, that a
Gnostic writer, following the Valentinian tradition, explains a famous
passage in the Pauline _Letter to the Ephesians_ as follows:

"'For this cause I bow my knees to the God and Father and Lord of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that God may vouchsafe to you that Christ may dwell in your
inner man'--that is to say, the psychic and not the bodily man--'that ye
may be strong to know what is the Depth'--that is, the Father of the
universals--'and what is the Breadth'--that is the Cross, the Boundary of
the Plērōma [or Fullness]--'and what is the Greatness'--that is, the
Plērōma of the æons [the eternities or universals, the Limbs of the
Body of the Ineffable]." (_F._, 532).

To be closely compared with the Vision in _The Acts of John_ is the
Address of Andrew to the Cross in _The Acts of Andrew_. They both plainly
belong to the same tradition, and might indeed have been written by the
same hand.

"Rejoicing I come to thee, Thou Cross, the Life-giver, Cross whom I now
know to be mine. I know thy mystery; for thou hast been planted in the
world to make-fast things unstable.

"Thy head stretcheth up into heaven, that thou mayest symbol-forth the
Heavenly Logos, the Head of all things.

"Thy middle parts are stretched forth, as it were hands to right and left,
to put to flight the envious and hostile power of the Evil One, that thou
mayest gather together into one them [_sci._, the Limbs] that are
scattered abroad.

"Thy foot is set in the earth, sunk in the deep [_i.e._, abyss], that thou
mayest draw up those that lie beneath the earth and are held fast in the
regions beneath it, and mayest join them to those in heaven.

"O Cross, engine, most skilfully devised, of Salvation, given unto men by
the Highest; O Cross, invincible trophy of the Conquest of Christ o'er His
foes; O Cross, thou life-giving tree, roots planted on earth, fruit
treasured in heaven; O Cross most venerable, sweet thing and sweet name;
O Cross most worshipful, who bearest as grapes the Master, the true vine,
who dost bear, too, the Thief as thy fruit, fruitage of faith through
confession; thou who bringest the worthy to God through the Gnosis and
summonest sinners home through repentance!"

A magnificent address indeed. The identification of the Master and the man
with the Cross and in the Cross is hardly disguised. The Cross is the Tree
of Life and the tree of death simultaneously. "Give up thy life that thou
mayest live," says that inspired mystic treatise, _The Voice of the
Silence_, and this is no other than the secret of the Mystery of the
Cross. The Master is hanged between two thieves, the one repentant and the
other obdurate, the soul turned towards the Light and towards the
Darkness, all united in the one Mystery of the Cross--the Mystery of Man.

We have seen above that Philip is hanged head downwards, but he is not
the most famous instance of this reversal. The best known is associated
with the name of Peter in the mystic romances.

Thus in a fragment of the Linus-collection called _The Martyrdom of
Peter_, we learn the doctrine as set forth in a speech put into the mouth
of Peter thus crucified:

"Fitly wast Thou alone stretched on the Cross with head on high, O Lord,
who hast redeemed all of the world from sin.

"I have desired to imitate Thee in Thy Passion too; yet would I not take
on myself to be hanged upright.

"For we, pure men and sinners, are born from Adam, but Thou art God of
God, Light of true Light, before all æons and after them; thought worthy
to become for men Man without strain of man, Thou has stood forth man's
glorious Saviour--Thou ever upright, ever raised on high, eternally Above!

"We, men according to the flesh, are sons of the First Man (Adam), who
sank his being in the earth, whose fall in human generation is shown
forth.

"For we are brought to birth in such a way, that we do seem to be poured
into earth, so that the right is left, the left doth right become; in that
our state is changed in those who are the authors of this life.

"For this world down below doth think the right what is the left--this
world in which Thou, Lord, hast found us like the Ninevites, and by Thy
holy preaching hast thou rescued these about to die."

The "authors of this life" of reversal, are the "parents" of the "lower
nature"; not our natural parents whom we are to love, but the powers of
illusion we are to abandon. The Jonah-myth was used as a type of the
Initiate, who after being "three days" in the Belly of the Fish, the Great
Life or Animal that dwells in the Ocean or Great Water, is vomited forth
re-generate, and so a fit vehicle for preaching with compelling words or
acts for the benefit of those in Nineveh or the Jerusalem Below, or this
world.

But for those who had ears to hear there was a still further instruction
concerning the secret of the Mystic Cross.

"But ye, my brothers, who have the right to hear, lend me the ears of your
heart, and understand what now must be revealed to you--the hidden mystery
of every nature and secret source of every thing composed.

"For the First Man, whose race I represent by my position, with head
reversed, doth symbolize the birth into destruction; for that his birth
was death and lacked the Life-stream.

"But of His own compassion the Power Above came down into the world, by
means of corporal substance, to him who by a just decree had been cast
down into the earth, and hanged upon the Cross, and by the means of this
most holy calling [the Cross] He did restore us, and did make for us these
present things (which had till then remained unchanged by men's
unrighteous error) into the Left, and those that men had taken for the
Left into eternal things.

"In exaltation of the Right He hath changed all the signs into their
proper nature, considering as good those thought not good, and those men
thought malefic most benign.

"Whence in a mystery the Lord hath said: 'If ye make not the Right like to
the Left, the Left like to the Right, Above as the Below, Before as the
Behind, ye shall not know God's Kingdom.'"

(This saying is from _The Gospel according to the Egyptians_.)

"This saying have I made manifest in myself, my brothers; this is the way
in which your eyes of flesh behold me hanging. It figures forth the Way of
the First Man.

"But ye, beloved, hearing these words, and, by conversion of your nature
and changing of your life, perfecting them, even as ye have turned you
from that Way of Error where ye trod, unto the most sure state of Faith,
so keep ye running, and strive towards the Peace that calls you from
Above, living the holy life. For that the Way in which ye travel there is
Christ.

"Therefore with Jesus, Christ, true God, ascend the Cross. He hath been
made for us the One and Only Word; whence also doth the Spirit say:
'Christ is the Word and Voice of God.'

"The Word in truth is symbolled forth by that straight stem on which I
hang. As for the Voice--since that voice is a thing of flesh, with
features not to be ascribed unto God's nature, the cross-piece of the
Cross is thought to figure forth that human nature which suffered the
fault of change in the First Man, but by the help of God-and-man received
again its real Mind.

"Right in the centre, joining twain in one, is set the nail of
discipline--conversion and repentance." (_F._, 446-449.)

The interpretation becomes somewhat strained towards the end. The
reversed hanging typified the man of sex, or the man still under the sway
of generation, separated into male and female. Such hang head-downwards in
the Great Womb of Nature, and all is reversed for them. Hanged upright,
the re-generate man contains in himself in active operation the twin
powers in union, now used for spiritual creation, and self-perfection.

And if it be thought that there is abandonment of any thing in this
consummation, then let it be known that it is only a giving up of the part
for the whole, the passing from the state of separation to the realization
of inexpressible bliss; for as the inspired writer of _The Untitled
Apocalypse_ phrases it in an ecstasy of enthusiasm:

"This is the eternal Father; this the ineffable, unthinkable,
incomprehensible, untranscendible Father. He it is in whom the All became
joyous; it rejoiced and was joyful, and brought forth in its joy myriads
of myriads of Æons; they were called the 'Births of Joy,' because the All
had joyed with the Father.

"These are the worlds from which the Cross upsprang; out of these
incorporeal Members did the Man arise." (_F._, 550).




  PRINTED BY PERCY LUND, HUMPHRIES AND CO., LTD.,
  THE COUNTRY PRESS, BRADFORD;
  3, AMEN CORNER, LONDON, E.C.;
  AND 97, BRIDGE STREET, MANCHESTER.
  14887




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Gnostic Crucifixion, by G. R. S. Mead

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GNOSTIC CRUCIFIXION ***

***** This file should be named 35735-0.txt or 35735-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/7/3/35735/

Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
